ESHRE guideline: ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI: 
an update in 2025†
The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation,  B. Ata 
1,2, E. Bosch 
3, S. Broer4, G. Griesinger 
5, M. Grynberg 
6,  
E. Kolibianakis 
7, M. Kunicki8,9, A. La Marca 
10, G. Lainas 
11, N. Le Clef 
12, N. Massin 
13, N.P. Polyzos 
14,  
S.K. Sunkara 
15, T. Timeva 
16, M. T€oyli17, J. Urbancsek18, and F. Broekmans 
4,19,
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey 
2ART Fertility Clinics, Dubai, United Arab Emirates 
3IVI-RMS Valencia, Valencia, Spain 
4Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynecology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
5Department of Gynecological Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, L€ubeck, Germany 
6Department of Reproductive Medicine and Fertility Preservation, Hospital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France 
7Unit for Human Reproduction, 1st Department of ObGyn, Medical School, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece 
8INVICTA Fertility and Reproductive Centre, Warsaw, Poland 
9Department of Gynaecological Endocrinology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland 
10Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy 
11Eugonia IVF, Unit of Human Reproduction, Athens, Greece 
12European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology, Belgium 
13Department of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproduction, University Paris-Est Creteil, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal, Creteil, France 
14Dexeus University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain 
15Department of Women and Children’s Health, King’s College London, London, UK 
16IVF Department, Specialized Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital “Dr. Shterev”, Sofia, Bulgaria 
17Kanta-H€ame Central Hospital, H€ameenlinna, Mehil€ainen Clinics, Helsinki, Finland 
18Division of Assisted Reproduction, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Semmelweis University Faculty of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary 
19Centre for Childwish, Dijklander Hospital, Purmerend, The Netherlands
Correspondence address. ESHRE Central office, BXL7, Building 1, Nijverheidslaan 3, B-1853 Strombeek-Bever, Belgium. E-mail: guidelines@eshre.eu
†ESHRE Pages content is not externally peer reviewed. The manuscript has been approved by the Executive Committee of ESHRE.
ABSTRACT 
STUDY QUESTION: What is the recommended management of ovarian stimulation, based on the best available evidence in 
the literature?
SUMMARY ANSWER: This updated ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI provides 121 recommendations, answering 
21 key questions on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY?: Before the ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI was published in 2019, ovarian 
stimulation for IVF/ICSI had only been discussed briefly in the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guideline on fertility 
problems and in a statement by the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: The guideline was developed according to the structured methodology for ESHRE guidelines. The 
18 key questions from the 2019 version of the guideline were revised by the Guideline Development Group (GDG). This resulted in the 
addition of one new key question, the splitting of the key question on fertility preservation in three separate key questions (fertility 
preservation for women facing gonadotoxic treatment, elective oocyte cryopreservation, and oocyte donation) and several new 
interventions being added to the existing key questions. Papers published between 31 October 2018 and 2 February 2025 and written 
in English were included. The critical outcomes for this guideline were efficacy in terms of cumulative live birth rate per started cycle 
or live birth rate per started cycle, as well as safety in terms of the rate of occurrence of moderate and/or severe ovarian hyperstimu­
lation syndrome (OHSS).
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Based on the available evidence, recommendations were formulated and 
discussed until consensus was reached within the GDG. Following stakeholder review of the initial draft, the final version was 
approved by the GDG and ultimately by the ESHRE Executive Committee.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The guideline provides a total of 121 recommendations: 42 recommendations 
remained unchanged in 2019, 4 recommendations were reworded for better understanding, 29 recommendations were updated in 
view of new evidence, and 46 new recommendations for 2025 have been formulated. The guideline provides 4 recommendations on 
pre-stimulation evaluation, 7 recommendations on pre-treatment therapies, 50 recommendations on pituitary suppression and 
Received: December 16, 2025. Accepted: January 9, 2026 
© The Author(s) 2026. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re- 
use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the 
Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com. 
Human Reproduction, 2026, 41(4), 498–514  
https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deag018 
Advance Access Publication Date: February 24, 2026 
ESHRE Pages   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

ovarian stimulation, 17 recommendations on monitoring, 18 recommendations on triggering of final oocyte maturation and luteal 
support, and 8 recommendations on the prevention of OHSS. In addition, the guideline provides 17 recommendations on fertility 
preservation, both oncologic and elective, and oocyte donation. These include 90 evidence-based recommendations, of which only 
42 were formulated as strong recommendations and 48 as conditional, as well as 29 good practice points and 2 research-only recom­
mendations. Of the evidence-based recommendations, none were supported by high-quality evidence, 6 by moderate-quality evi­
dence, 36 by low-quality evidence, and 148 by very low-quality evidence. To support future research on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ 
ICSI, a list of research recommendations was provided.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Several newer interventions are not well studied yet. For most of these interventions, a rec­
ommendation against the intervention or a research-only recommendation was formulated based on insufficient evidence. Future 
studies may require these recommendations to be revised.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The guideline provides clinicians with clear advice on best practice in ovarian stimula­
tion, based on the best evidence available. In addition, a list of research recommendations is provided to promote further studies in 
ovarian stimulation.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): The guideline was developed by ESHRE, who funded the guideline meetings, literature 
searches, and dissemination of the guideline. The guideline group members did not receive any financial incentives; all work was 
provided voluntarily. BA reports speaker’s fees from Gedeon-Richter, Ferring, IBSA, Intas, Merck, Organon, consulting fees from 
Merck, Organon, Oxolife, stock options from Global Fertility Solutions LLC (employee co-investment), and was chair of the Turkish 
Society of Reproductive Medicine. EB reports research grants from Roche Diagnostics and IBSA, consulting fees from MSD, Abbot, 
Gedeon-Richter, Roche, speaker’s fees from IBSA, MSD, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Abbot, Gedeon-Richter, Merck, Roche, participation 
in the advisory board of Ferring Pharmaceuticals, IBSA and Merck, and ownership interest from IVI-RMS Valencia. GG was part of the 
ESHRE working group on Recurrent Implantation Failure and the ESHRE working group on clinical KPISs, reports travel support from 
Merck, Organon, Ferring, Theramex, Gedeon-Richter, Abbott, consulting fees from Organon, Ferring, Merck, Gedeon-Richter, 
Theramex, Abbott, ReproNovo, Igyxos, OxoLife, Philipps, ReprodWissen, PregLem, Guerbet, Roche, IBSA, and Besins, speaker’s fees 
from Organon, Ferring, Merck, Gedeon-Richter, Theramex, Abbott, ReproNovo, Igyxos, OxoLife, Philipps, ReprodWissen, PregLem, 
Guerbet, Roche, IBSA, and Besins, and research grants from Besin, Merck, Abbott, Ferring, Theramex. MG reports speaker’s fees from 
Merck Serono, Ferring, and Gedeon Richter. EK reports travel/hotel expenses from Ferring, Merck SERONO, Vianex, speaker’s fees 
from Ferring, Merck SERONO, Vianex, and is chair of the Greek Society of Fertility and Sterility. MK reports travel support and speak­
er’s fees from Ferring. ALM reports research grants from Merck, Ferring, IBSA, Roche, Organon, Theramex, Beckman Coulter, and 
Gedeon-Richter, consulting fees from Merck, Ferring, IBSA, Roche, Organon, Theramex, Beckman Coulter, and Gedeon-Richter, 
speaker’s fees from Merck, Ferring, IBSA, Roche, Organon, Theramex, Beckman Coulter, Gedeon-Richter, and participation on an ad­
visory board of Merck, Organon, Ferring, Theramex, Gedeon Richter, and IBSA. GL reports consulting fees from Ferring and Merck, 
speaker’s fees from Ferring, Merck, Gedeon-Richter, Organon, and Vianex, expert testimony fees from Cook, travel support from 
ESHRE, Ferring, Merck, Gedeon-Richter, Organon, and Vianex, is on the advisory board of Merck and Ferring, and participated in an 
ESHRE committee and on the Greek Fertility and Sterility Committee. NM reports research grants from IBSA, Organon, consulting 
fees from Organon, Merck, GE, Ferring, Abbott, and Cooper, and speaker’s fees from Ferring, GE, Organon, IBSA, Merck, Theramex. 
NPP reports research grants from Besins Healthcare, Ferring Pharmaceutical, Merck Serono, Organon, Roche Diagnostics, and 
Theramex, consulting fees from Besins Healthcare, Alife, Ferring, IBSA, Merck Serono, Organon, Abbott, FertilAI, and speaker’s fees 
from Besins Healthcare, Roche Diagnostics, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Gedeon-Richter, IBSA, Merck Serono, Organon, and Theramex. 
SKS reports a research grant from Ferring, travel support from Merck and INTAS, consulting fees from Merck, and speaker’s fees 
from Merck, MSD, INTAS, and Ferring. TT reports travel support from Merck, speaker’s fees from Merck, Organon, MSD and is editor- 
in-chief of a Bulgarian journal, Reproductive Health. MT reports travel support from IBSA, Ferring, and Merck, consulting fees from 
Abbott and is a member of the board of the Finnish Endocrine Society. JU is a member of the Steering Committee of Richter 
Reproduction Network and received travel support from IBSA. FB reports a research grant from Besins, is on the advisory board of 
Merck and Abbott, reports speaker’s fees from Ferring, Merck, Besins, Intas Fermaceuticals, PREIS School; he is the owner of 
FRANKSCHOOL RforL. The other authors have nothing to disclose.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: N/A.
DISCLAIMER: This guideline represents the views of ESHRE, which were achieved after careful consideration of the scientific evi­
dence available at the time of preparation. In the absence of scientific evidence on certain aspects, a consensus between the relevant 
ESHRE stakeholders has been obtained.
Adherence to these clinical practice guidelines does not guarantee a successful or specific outcome, nor does it establish a standard of care. Clinical 
practice guidelines do not replace the need for application of clinical judgment to each individual presentation, nor variations based on locality and 
facility type.
ESHRE makes no warranty, express or implied, regarding the clinical practice guidelines and specifically excludes any warranties of merchantability 
and fitness for a particular use or purpose. (The full disclaimer is available at www.eshre.eu/guidelines.)
Keywords: ovarian stimulation / ESHRE / guideline / IVF / ICSI / fertility preservation / oocyte donation / ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome / poor responder / high responder 
Introduction
Ovarian stimulation (OS) is defined as pharmacological treat­
ment with the intention of inducing the development of a few, 
several, or many ovarian follicles. It can be used (i) for timed in­
tercourse or insemination and (ii) in assisted reproduction, to ob­
tain multiple oocytes at follicular aspiration (Zegers-Hochschild 
et al., 2017).
OS for IVF/ICSI has not been addressed by existing evidence- 
based guidelines. It is discussed briefly in the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence guideline on fertility problems 
and the Royal Australian and New Zealand Colleges of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists have published a statement on 
OS in assisted reproduction. Based on the lack of guidelines, the 
ESHRE Special Interest Group Reproductive Endocrinology initi­
ated the development of an ESHRE guideline focusing on all 
aspects of OS for IVF/ICSI.
In 2019, ESHRE published a guideline on OS for IVF/ICSI, aim­
ing to provide clinicians with evidence-based information on the 
different options for OS for IVF/ICSI, taking into account issues 
such as the ‘optimal’ ovarian response, live birth rates (LBR), 
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 499  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

safety, patient compliance, and individualization. In this new 
guideline, special attention has also been given to pre- and adju­
vant treatments in LOW responders and the prevention of ovar­
ian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) in HIGH responders.
The current guideline is an update of the version from 2019, 
with amendments to the recommendations based on recently 
published data. Where amendments were made, this is labelled 
as such [updated]. If the GDG felt rewording of a recommenda­
tion was necessary without new evidence on the topic, this was 
also indicated [reworded].
Materials and methods
The guideline was developed according to a well-documented 
methodology that is universal to ESHRE guidelines (Vermeulen 
et al., 2020).
In the terminology part, it was decided to replace the term 
POOR response by LOW response in order to refrain from making 
any suggestion on prognosis or safety for this specific group.
In short, the 18key questions from the 2019 version of the guide­
line were revised by the Guideline Development Group (GDG). This 
resulted in the addition of one new key question, the splitting of the 
key question on fertility preservation into three separate key ques­
tions (fertility preservation for women facing gonadotoxic treat­
ment, elective oocyte cryopreservation and oocyte donation), and 
several new interventions being added to the existing key ques­
tions. The final guideline was built from a list of 21key questions, 
all 
answered 
with 
systematic 
reviews 
as 
PICO 
(Patient, 
Intervention, Comparison, Outcome) questions. For each PICO 
question, databases (PUBMED/MEDLINE and the Cochrane library) 
were searched from the date of the last searches of the 2019 version 
of the guideline (31 October 2018) up to 2 February 2025, with the 
limitation of studies written in English. From the literature 
searches, studies were selected based on the PICO questions, 
assessed for quality, and summarized in evidence tables and sum­
mary of findings tables. The critical outcomes for this guideline are 
efficacy in terms of cumulative live birth rate (CLBR) per started cy­
cle and LBR per started cycle, as well as safety in terms of moderate 
and/or severe OHSS. GDG meetings were organized (primarily on­
line) where the evidence and draft recommendations were pre­
sented by the assigned GDG member and discussed until 
consensus was reached within the group.
Each recommendation was labelled as strong or conditional, 
and a grade was assigned (Andrews et al., 2013) based on the 
strength of the supporting evidence (high %%%%, moderate 
%%%, low %%, and very low %). In the absence of ev­
idence, the GDG formulated no recommendation or a good prac­
tice point (GPP) based on clinical expertise.
Strong recommendations suggest that the recommended option 
applies in most circumstances, whereas conditional recommenda­
tions are dependent on specific factors, which need to be considered 
with benefits/risks weighed before applying a given option (Fig. 1).
The guideline draft and an invitation to participate in the 
stakeholder review were published on the ESHRE website be­
tween 5 May 2025 and 16 June 2025. In addition, all relevant 
stakeholders received a personal invitation to review by e-mail. 
We received 486 comments from 156 reviewers. All comments 
were processed by the GDG, either by adapting the content of the 
guideline and/or by replying to the reviewer. The review process 
was summarized in the review report, which is published on the 
ESHRE website (www.eshre.eu/guidelines).
This guideline will be considered for update four years after 
publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need for 
updating two years after publication.
Results
Key questions and recommendations
The current document summarizes all the key questions and the 
recommendations from the 2025 update of the ESHRE guideline on 
‘ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI’. Further background information 
and the supporting evidence for each recommendation can be 
found in the full version of the guideline available at www.eshre. 
eu/OSguideline. For easy reference, the recommendations have 
been summarized in schematic overviews (Figs 2 and 3).
Figure 1. Suggested interpretation of the strong and conditional recommendations included in the guideline by patients, health care professionals 
(HCPs) and health care policy makers.
500 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Pre-stimulation evaluation
Is the assessment of the predicted response to ovarian 
stimulation sufficiently reliable?
What is the prognostic value of hormonal assessment 
at baseline?
Pre-treatment therapies
Does hormone pre-treatment improve efficacy and safety of 
ovarian stimulation?
Figure 2. Schematic overview of recommendations from the guideline ‘Ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI’ for high, normal, and low responders. 
AMH: anti-M€ullerian hormone; AFC: antral follicle count; r-hLH: luteinizing hormone; GnRH: gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IU: international units; 
FSH: follicle-stimulating hormone; r-hFSH: recombinant FSH; p-FSH: purified FSH; hp-FSH: highly purified FSH; hMG: human menopausal 
gonadotropin; hCG: human chorionic gonadotropin; LPS: luteal phase support.
For predicting high and low response to ovarian 
stimulation, the use of either antral follicle count 
(AFC) or anti-M€ullerian hormone (AMH) is 
recommended. [updated] (Liu et al., 2023b)
Strong 
%
Age, BMI, basal FSH, inhibin B, basal oestradiol, 
basal progesterone, and basal LH are not 
recommended for the prediction of ovarian re­
sponse. [2025] (Broekmans et al., 2006; Broer et al., 
2013a,b)
Strong 
%
AFC, AMH, basal FSH, basal LH, basal oestradiol, 
basal progesterone, and inhibin B are not 
recommended for the prediction of pregnancy and 
live birth. [updated] (Broekmans et al., 2006; Doody 
et al., 2010; Broer et al., 2013b; Sun et al., 2018; Wang 
et al., 2022; Liu and Wang, 2023; Lim et al., 2024; 
Zhang et al., 2024)
Strong 
%
Female age and BMI are predictors of pregnancy 
and live birth. [2025] (Broer et al., 2013b)
Strong 
%
Pre-treatment with oestrogen before ovarian stimu­
lation using the GnRH antagonist protocol is not rec­
ommended for improving efficacy. [updated] (Zhu 
et al., 2022)
Strong 
%%
Pre-treatment with progesterone before ovarian 
stimulation is probably not recommended for im­
proving efficacy. [reworded] (Farquhar et al., 2017)
Conditional 
%%
Oestrogen or progesterone pre-treatment can be 
used for scheduling purposes, given the data on effi­
cacy and safety. [reworded]
GPP
Combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) pre-treat­
ment is not recommended in the GnRH antagonist 
protocol with FSH alone stimulation, because of re­
duced efficacy. [updated] (Farquhar et al., 2017)
Strong 
%%
A minimal washout period of 5 days may be applied 
if COCP is used for programming cycle in the case of 
a fresh transfer. [2025]
GPP
GnRH antagonist pre-treatment before ovarian stim­
ulation in a delayed-start gonadotropin protocol is 
probably not recommended. [2019] (Blockeel et al., 
2011a, Eftekhar et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%
hCG pre-treatment can only be used in the context of 
a clinical trial. [2025] (Beretsos et al., 2009)
Research  
only
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 501  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Pituitary suppression and ovarian stimulation
According to predicted response-based stratification, which 
stimulation protocol is most efficient and safe?
High responder
Normal responder
Low responder
Which pituitary suppression protocol is preferable?
Figure 3. Schematic overview of recommendations from the guideline ‘Ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI’ for fertility preservation in women facing 
gonadotoxic therapies, elective cryopreservation, and oocyte donation. AMH: anti-M€ullerian hormone; AFC: antral follicle count; r-hLH: luteinizing 
hormone; GnRH: gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IU: international units; FSH: follicle-stimulating hormone; r-hFSH: recombinant FSH; p-FSH: 
purified FSH; hp-FSH: highly purified FSH; hMG: human menopausal gonadotropin; hCG: human chorionic gonadotropin; BC: breast cancer.
Delayed-start ovarian stimulation is probably not 
recommended routinely in predicted high responders 
to decrease the risk of OHSS. [2025] (Casano et al., 
2012; Revelli et al., 2020)
Conditional 
%
A reduced gonadotropin dose (100 to <150 IU) is 
probably recommended to decrease the risk of OHSS 
in predicted high responders. [2025] (Arce et al., 2014; 
Oudshoorn et al., 2017; Ishihara et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%
The GnRH antagonist protocol is recommended for 
predicted high responders. [updated] (Oudshoorn 
et al., 2017)
Strong 
%
Delayed-start ovarian stimulation is probably not 
recommended over a conventional gonadotropin 
dose for predicted normal responders. [2025] 
(Hohmann et al., 2003; Baart et al., 2007; Lou and 
Huang, 2010; Blockeel et al., 2011b; Revelli et al., 2020)
Conditional 
%
Neither a reduced nor an increased gonadotropin dose 
is probably recommended over a conventional gonado­
tropin dose (equivalent to 150-225IU) for predicted nor­
mal responders. [updated] (Ngwenya et al., 2024)
Conditional 
%
Delayed start ovarian stimulation is probably not 
recommended for predicted low responders. [2025] 
(Revelli et al., 2020)
Conditional 
%
The use of modified natural cycle is probably not 
routinely recommended over conventional 
stimulation for low responders. [updated] (Morgia 
et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2009; De Marco et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%
The GDG recognizes that low responders are a 
heterogeneous group and in women with very low 
ovarian reserve, clinicians could choose to use a 
modified natural cycle. [2025]
GPP
A gonadotropin dose higher than 300 IU is not 
recommended for predicted low responders. [2019] 
(Ngwenya et al., 2024)
Strong 
%
If GnRH agonists are used, the long GnRH agonist proto­
col is recommended over the short or ultrashort GnRH 
agonist protocol. [updated] (Siristatidis et al., 2025)
Strong 
%%
The GnRH antagonist protocol is recommended over 
the GnRH agonist protocols, given the comparable 
efficacy and higher safety in the general IVF/ICSI 
population. [2019] (Liu et al., 2023a)
Strong 
%%%
(continued)
502 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Is the type of stimulation drug associated with efficacy 
and safety?
Is adjustment of the gonadotropin dosage during the 
stimulation phase meaningful in terms of efficacy 
and safety?
Is the addition of adjuncts in ovarian stimulation 
meaningful in terms of efficacy and safety?
The fixed GnRH antagonist protocol is probably rec­
ommended over the flexible GnRH antagonist proto­
col. [2025] (Venetis et al., 2023)
Conditional 
%%
If freeze-all is planned, the use of progestin for pitui­
tary suppression is probably equally recommended 
to GnRH analogues. [updated] (Glujovsky et al., 2023)
Conditional 
%
The use of recombinant human FSH (r-hFSH) and hu­
man menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) for ovarian 
stimulation is equally recommended. [2019] 
(Bordewijk et al., 2019)
Strong 
%%%
The use of recombinant human FSH (r-hFSH) and pu­
rified FSH (p-FSH) for ovarian stimulation in the 
GnRH agonist protocol is equally recommended. 
[2019] (van Wely et al., 2011)
Strong 
%%
The use of either recombinant human FSH (r-hFSH) 
or highly purified FSH (hp-FSH) for ovarian stimula­
tion in the GnRH agonist protocol is equally recom­
mended. [2019] (Bordewijk et al., 2019)
Strong 
%%
The combination of r-hFSH with r-hLH and r-hFSH 
alone is probably equally recommended for the gen­
eral IVF population. [2025] (Mochtar et al., 2017)
Conditional 
%%
The combination of r-hFSH with r-hLH and r-hFSH 
alone is probably equally recommended for low res­
ponders. [2025] (Ferraretti et al., 2014; Humaidan 
et al., 2017)
Conditional 
%%
The combination of r-hFSH with r-hLH and r-hFSH 
alone is probably equally recommended for women 
of advanced age (≥35 years). [2025] (Conforti 
et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%%
The combined use of recombinant human FSH (rFSH) 
with human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG), either 
from the start or mid-phase of ovarian stimulation, is 
probably not recommended over the use of either r- 
hFSH or hMG alone in normal and low responders. 
[2025] (Taronger et al., 2018; Shu et al., 2019; Decleer 
et al., 2020)
Conditional 
%%
The use of long-acting and daily recombinant human 
FSH (r-hFSH) is equally recommended in GnRH an­
tagonist cycles for normal responders. [2019] 
(Cozzolino et al., 2019)
Strong 
%
Follitropin delta and follitropin alpha/beta are 
equally recommended for ovarian stimulation. [2025]
Strong 
%
The use of highly purified FSH (hp-FSH) and human 
menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) for ovarian stimu­
lation in GnRH agonist protocols is equally recom­
mended. [2019] (Duijkers et al., 1993; Westergaard 
et al., 1996; Parsanezhad et al., 2017)
Conditional 
%%
The use of recombinant human LH þ recombinant 
human FSH (r-hFSHþr-hLH) for ovarian stimulation 
is probably not recommended over human meno­
pausal gonadotropin (hMG) in GnRH agonist proto­
cols with regard to safety. [2019] (Pacchiarotti 
et al., 2010)
Conditional 
%
Adding low dosages of hCG to the FSH stimulation is 
probably not recommended. [2025] (Koichi et al., 
2006; Serafini et al., 2006; Madani et al., 2012; Thuesen 
et al., 2012; Zhu and Fu, 2019; Decleer et al., 2020; 
Siristatidis et al., 2022)
Conditional 
%
The addition of letrozole to gonadotropins in stimula­
tion protocols for predicted high responders is proba­
bly not recommended. [updated] (Yang et al., 2019; 
Tshzmachyan and Hambartsoumian, 2020; Ghasemi 
Tehrani et al., 2022; Lotfy et al., 2022)
Conditional 
%
(continued)
The addition of letrozole to gonadotropins in stimula­
tion protocols is probably not recommended for pre­
dicted normal responders. [2019] (Mukherjee et al., 
2012; Eftekhar and Saeed, 2020; B€ulow et al., 2022)
Conditional 
%
The addition of letrozole to gonadotropins in stimula­
tion protocols is probably not recommended for pre­
dicted low responders. [2019] (Qin, 2021)
Conditional 
%%
The addition of clomiphene citrate to gonadotropins 
in stimulation protocols is probably not recom­
mended for predicted high responders. [2019] (Lotfy 
et al., 2022)
Conditional 
%%
The addition of clomiphene citrate to gonadotropins 
in stimulation protocols is probably not recom­
mended for predicted normal responders. [2025] 
(Datta et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%%%
Clomiphene citrate alone or in combination with 
gonadotropins, and gonadotropin stimulation alone 
are probably equally recommended for predicted low 
responders. [updated] (Montoya-Botero et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%%
Adjustment (increase or decrease) of the gonadotro­
pin dose in the mid-stimulation phase during ovarian 
stimulation is probably not recommended. [2019] 
(van Hooff et al., 1993; Aboulghar et al., 2000; Cedrin- 
Durnerin et al., 2000; Aboulghar et al., 2004; Martin 
et al., 2006; Lawrenz et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2024)
Conditional 
%
Given the lack of evidence of the value of dose 
adjustments during ovarian stimulation, it is 
important that the gonadotropin starting dose is 
appropriate based on patient characteristics and 
desired outcome. [2025]
GPP
Routine use of adjunct metformin before and/or dur­
ing ovarian stimulation is probably not recom­
mended when using the GnRH antagonist protocol 
for women with PCOS. [updated] (Tso et al., 2020)
Conditional 
%%
Use of adjunct growth hormone before and/or during 
ovarian stimulation is not recommended for normal 
responders. [2025] (Sood et al., 2021)
Strong 
%
Use of adjunct growth hormone before and/or during 
ovarian stimulation is probably not recommended 
for low responders. [updated] (Liu et al., 2025)
Conditional 
%
Use of adjunct growth hormone before and/or during 
ovarian stimulation is not recommended for women 
with PCOS. [2025] (Gong et al., 2020)
Strong 
%%
Use of testosterone before ovarian stimulation is 
probably not recommended for low responders. 
[updated] (Naik et al., 2024)
Conditional 
%%%
Use of DHEA before and/or during ovarian stimula­
tion is not recommended for low responders. [2019] 
(Huang et al., 2025)
Strong 
%%
Use of DHEA before and/or during ovarian stimula­
tion is not recommended for normal responders. 
[2025] (Huang et al., 2025)
Strong 
%%
(continued)
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 503  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

What is the safety and efficacy of non-conventional start 
stimulation compared to standard early follicular phase 
stimulation?
Fertility preservation and oocyte donation
What is the preferred stimulation protocol for fertility 
preservation in patients facing gonadotoxic treatment?
What is the preferred stimulation protocol for elective 
oocyte cryopreservation?
What is the preferred stimulation protocol for 
oocyte donation?
Monitoring
Is the addition of hormonal assessment (oestradiol/ 
progesterone/LH) to ultrasound monitoring improving 
efficacy and safety?
Use of aspirin before and/or during ovarian stimula­
tion is not recommended in the general IVF/ICSI pop­
ulation, nor for low responders. [2019] (Siristatidis 
et al., 2016)
Strong 
%%%
Use of sildenafil before and/or during ovarian stimu­
lation is not recommended for low responders. [2019] 
(Ataalla et al., 2016)
Strong 
%
Use of myo-inositol before and/or during ovarian 
stimulation is probably not recommended for women 
with PCOS undergoing IVF. [2025] (Showell 
et al., 2018)
Conditional 
%
Use of myo-inositol before and/or during ovarian 
stimulation is not recommended in low responders. 
[2025] (Nazari et al., 2020; Mohammadi et al., 2021)
Strong 
%%
Use of myo-inositol before and/or during ovarian 
stimulation is not recommended in non-PCOS 
women undergoing IVF. [2025] (Seyedoshohadaei 
et al., 2022)
Strong 
%%
Random-start ovarian stimulation could be used when a 
fresh transfer is not intended; nonetheless, the risk of 
OHSS in case of concurrent spontaneous conception 
should always be discussed with the patient. [reworded] 
(Qin et al., 2016; Pereira et al., 2017)
GPP
Luteal start ovarian stimulation could be used when a 
fresh transfer is not intended, and there is no possibility 
of natural conception. [updated] (Cerrillo et al., 2023; 
Massin et al., 2023; Su~nol et al., 2023; Boudry et al., 2024; 
Dastjerdi et al., 2024; Saharkhiz et al., 2024)
Conditional 
%
Late luteal phase start of gonadotropins with fresh 
transfer is probably not recommended for low 
responders. [updated] (Rombauts et al., 1998; Kansal 
Kalra et al., 2008; Kucuk et al., 2008)
Conditional 
%
Double stimulation can be considered for urgent fertility 
preservation cycles. [2019]
GPP
Double stimulation can be used with the intention to 
accumulate oocytes or embryos when a fresh transfer 
is not planned. [updated] (Cerrillo et al., 2023; Massin 
et al., 2023)
Strong 
%%
For patients facing gonadotoxic treatment, ovarian 
stimulation for fertility preservation should be started 
irrespective of the menstrual cycle phase. [updated] 
(Boots et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2022; S€onmezer et al., 2023)
Strong 
%
For ovarian stimulation in women seeking fertility 
preservation for medical reasons, the GnRH antagonist 
protocol is recommended. [2019] (Boots et al., 2016; 
Rodgers et al., 2017)
Strong 
%
In ovarian stimulation for fertility preservation in  
oestrogen-sensitive diseases, the concomitant use of 
anti-oestrogen therapy, such as letrozole or tamoxifen, 
can be considered. [2019] (Chen et al., 2022; Yoshida 
et al., 2023)
GPP
For final oocyte maturation in patients facing 
gonadotoxic treatment, a GnRH agonist is preferred. 
[2025] (Hong et al., 2022; Massarotti et al., 2023)
GPP
Ovarian stimulation for elective oocyte preservation 
can be started irrespective of the menstrual cycle 
phase. [2025] (Pereira et al., 2017)
Conditional 
%
GnRH antagonist or progestin protocols are probably 
recommended over GnRH agonist protocols for 
pituitary suppression in elective oocyte 
cryopreservation. [2025] (Vaiarelli et al., 2024)
Conditional 
%
For final oocyte maturation in elective oocyte 
cryopreservation, a GnRH agonist is preferred. [2025] 
(Kim et al., 2020; Maslow et al., 2020; Herzberger 
et al., 2021)
GPP
Conventional follicular start or random-start ovarian 
stimulation is equally recommended for oocyte do­
nation cycles. [2025] (Martinez et al., 2022; De Rijdt 
et al., 2024; Guerrero et al., 2024)
Strong 
%
If random-start ovarian stimulation is used, oocyte 
donors need to adopt contraceptive measures to pre­
vent the possibility of a natural pregnancy. [2025]
GPP
Any type of contraception (hormonal, non-hormonal, 
oral, vaginal, or intrauterine) can be used before initi­
ation of ovarian stimulation in oocyte donors. [2025]
GPP
Progestin or intrauterine contraception can be used 
during ovarian stimulation in oocyte donors. [2025]
GPP
For pituitary suppression in oocyte donors, the GnRH 
antagonist and progestin protocol is probably equally 
recommended. [2025] (Bodri et al., 2011; Martinez 
et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%%
A GnRH agonist protocol for pituitary suppression is 
not recommended in oocyte donors. [2025]
GPP
The use of recombinant human FSH (r-hFSH), puri­
fied FSH, long-acting r-hFSH, or hMG is probably 
equally recommended in oocyte donors undergoing 
ovarian stimulation. [2025] (S€oderstr€om-Anttila et al., 
1996; Tesarik and Mendoza, 2002; Acevedo et al., 
2004; Melo et al., 2010;Cruz et al., 2017; Alvarado 
Franco et al., 2023)
Conditional 
%
Gonadotropin dose should be individualized based on 
ovarian reserve, with the goal to maintain donors’ 
safety and also to obtain an optimal number of 
oocytes. [2025]
GPP
The routine use of a GnRH agonist trigger is recom­
mended in oocyte donors using the GnRH antagonist 
or progestin protocols for pituitary suppression. 
[2025] (Youssef et al., 2014)
Strong 
%%
The use of an hCG trigger is not routinely recom­
mended in oocyte donation cycles. [2025] (Youssef 
et al., 2014)
Strong 
%%
The addition of oestradiol measurements to ultra­
sound monitoring is probably not recommended. 
[2019] (Kwan et al., 2021)
Conditional 
%%
(continued)
504 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Does monitoring of endometrial thickness affect the efficacy 
and safety?
Is the outcome of ovarian stimulation dependent on the 
criteria for final oocyte maturation?
Is hormonal assessment on the day of final oocyte 
maturation recommended?
Which criteria for cycle cancellation are meaningful 
regarding predicted low/high oocyte yield?
Triggering ovulation and luteal support
What is the preferred drug for triggering final oocyte 
maturation in terms of efficacy and safety in the overall 
IVF/ICSI population?
What is the efficacy and safety of luteal support protocols?
The addition of a hormonal panel consisting of a 
combination of oestradiol, progesterone, and LH 
measurements to ultrasound monitoring is probably 
not recommended. [2019] (Golan et al., 1994; Wiser 
et al., 2012)
Conditional 
%
Routine monitoring of endometrial thickness during 
controlled ovarian stimulation is probably not 
recommended. [2019] (Kasius et al., 2014; Gao 
et al., 2020)
Conditional 
%
The guideline group suggests performing a single 
measurement of the endometrium during ultrasound 
assessment on the day of triggering or oocyte pick-up 
to counsel patients on the potential lower pregnancy 
chance. [2019]
GPP
The association of follicle size as a triggering criterion 
with outcome has not been sufficiently studied. 
Physicians may choose the follicle size upon which 
final oocyte maturation is triggered on a case-by-case 
basis. [2019] (Chen et al., 2014)
Conditional 
%%
The decision on timing of triggering in relation to 
follicle size is multi-factorial, taking into account the 
size of the growing follicle cohort, the hormonal data on 
the day of the pursued trigger, duration of 
stimulation, embryo transfer strategy, patient 
burden, financial costs, experience of previous cycles, 
and organizational factors for the centre. Most often, fi­
nal oocyte maturation is triggered at sizes of several of 
the leading follicles between 16 and 22mm. [reworded]
GPP
The GDG does not recommend to base timing of final oo­
cyte maturation triggering on oestradiol levels 
alone. [2019]
GPP
The GDG does not recommend to base timing of final oo­
cyte maturation on oestradiol/follicle ratio alone. [2019]
GPP
It is probably recommended to measure serum 
progesterone levels on the day of final oocyte 
maturation in cycles aimed for a fresh embryo  
transfer. [2025] (Venetis et al., 2013)
Conditional 
%
If serum progesterone levels are high, the patient should 
be counselled about potentially lower ongoing preg­
nancy/live birth rates. 
The decision to defer embryo transfer should include 
other factors (number of oocytes, number of embryos, 
and embryo quality). [2025] 
GPP
It is not recommended to routinely measure serum oes­
tradiol levels on the day of hCG trigger in ovarian stimu­
lation cycles with the intent for a fresh embryo transfer. 
[2025] (Karatasiou et al., 2020)
Strong 
%
It is not recommended to measure serum LH levels on 
the day of hCG trigger in ovarian stimulation cycles 
aimed for a fresh embryo transfer. [2025] (Zhang et al., 
2022; Luo et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023)
Strong 
%
It is not recommended to measure serum oestradiol, 
progesterone, or luteinizing hormone levels on the day 
of a GnRH agonist trigger in freeze-all cycles. [2025] 
(Kummer et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2016; Popovic-Todorovic 
et al., 2019; Gambini et al., 2024)
Strong 
%
A low response to ovarian stimulation alone is not a rea­
son to cancel a cycle. [2019] (Oudendijk et al., 2012)
Strong 
%
The physician should counsel the individual unexpected 
low responder regarding pregnancy prospects and de­
cide individually whether to continue this cy­
cle. [updated]
GPP
In GnRH agonist cycles with an ovarian response of ≥19 fol­
licles of ≥11mm, there is an increased risk of OHSS and 
preventative measures are recommended, which should in­
clude primarily cancelling the final oocyte maturation trig­
ger. [updated] (Mathur et al., 2000; Papanikolaou et al., 2006; 
Steward et al., 2014; Griesinger et al., 2016)
Strong 
%
In GnRH antagonist cycles, withholding GnRH agonist 
triggering may still be considered in women with ex­
tremely high ovarian response. [2025]
GPP
The use of recombinant hCG and urinary hCG is 
equally recommended for triggering final oocyte 
maturation in ovarian stimulation protocols. [2019] 
(Youssef et al., 2016)
Strong 
%%
A reduced dose of 5000 IU urinary hCG for final 
oocyte maturation is probably recommended over a 
10 000 IU dose in GnRH agonist protocols, as it may 
improve safety. [2019] (Shaltout et al., 2006; 
Kolibianakis et al., 2007; Madani et al., 2013)
Conditional 
%
It is not recommended to administer recombinant 
human LH for triggering final oocyte maturation. 
[2019] (Youssef et al., 2016)
Strong 
%
The use of GnRH agonist for final oocyte maturation 
is not recommended in the general IVF/ICSI 
population with fresh transfer, regardless of luteal 
phase support (with or without LH-activity). 
[updated] (Beebeejaun et al., 2025)
Strong 
%%
If the GnRH agonist trigger with triptorelin is applied, 
dosages ranging between 0.1 and 0.4 mg can 
be chosen. [2019]
GPP
The addition of a GnRH agonist to hCG as a dual 
trigger for final oocyte maturation is probably not 
recommended for predicted normal responders. 
[2019] (Beebeejaun et al., 2025)
Conditional 
%%
The addition of a GnRH agonist to hCG as a dual 
trigger for final oocyte maturation is probably not 
recommended for low responders. [2025] (He et al., 
2023; Keskin et al., 2023)
Conditional 
%%
Progesterone is recommended for luteal phase sup­
port after IVF/ICSI. [2019] (Hurd et al., 1996; Abate 
et al., 1999)
Strong 
%
Any of the previously mentioned administration 
routes (non-oral) for natural progesterone as luteal 
phase support can be used. [2019]
GPP
(continued)
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 505  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Prevention of OHSS
Which is the best strategy to reduce OHSS in the observed 
high responder regarding ovulation triggering and embryo 
transfer strategy?
Is the freeze-all protocol meaningful in the prevention of 
ovarian hyper-stimulation syndrome also with regards 
to efficacy?
Discussion
The updated ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI 
aims to supply healthcare providers with the best available evi­
dence for approaches in the various steps and phases of OS for 
IVF/ICSI.
All recommendations in the guideline were formulated after 
an assessment of the best available evidence in the literature and 
discussion within the GDG, taking into account the balance of 
benefits versus harms, patient preferences, clinicians’ expertise, 
and resource use. The guideline provides a total of 121 recom­
mendations: 42 recommendations remained unchanged, 4 rec­
ommendations were reworded for better understanding, 29 
recommendations were updated in view of new evidence, and 46 
new recommendations for 2025 have been formulated. The 
guideline provides 4 recommendations on pre-stimulation evalu­
ation, 7 recommendations on pre-treatment therapies, 50 recom­
mendations on pituitary suppression and ovarian stimulation, 17 
recommendations on monitoring, 18 recommendations on trig­
gering of final oocyte maturation and luteal support, and 8 rec­
ommendations on the prevention of OHSS. In addition, the 
guideline provides 17 recommendations on fertility preservation, 
both oncologic and elective, and oocyte donation. These include 
90 evidence-based recommendations, of which only 42 were for­
mulated as strong recommendations, as well as 29 good practice 
points and 2 research-only recommendations. Of the evidence- 
based recommendations, none were supported by high-quality 
evidence, 6 by moderate-quality evidence, 36 by low-quality evi­
dence, and 148 by very low-quality evidence. To support future 
research on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI, a list of research 
recommendations was provided.
With this update of the ovarian stimulation guideline, the 
guideline development group (GDG) would like to highlight their 
preference in changing the terminology for the different types of 
responders from poor, normal, and excessive to low, normal, and 
high. In addition, they would like to advice clinicians to refrain 
from using non-standardized terminology, such as ‘healthy’ res­
ponders, ‘kind’ stimulation, etc.
The GDG also took the opportunity to improve its structure to 
make it even more clear and even more user-friendly. This 
resulted in adaptations in the chapter on pre-stimulation evalua­
tion, where now the same diagnostic tests are discussed for as­
sessment of ovarian response as for pregnancy prediction. In 
addition, the key question on fertility preservation was split up 
into three parts: fertility preservation for women facing gonado­
toxic treatment, elective oocyte cryopreservation, and oocyte do­
nation. Even though freeze-all cycles are used in most cases for 
all three indications, it is clear that these are three different pa­
tient populations, requiring a different strategy for ovarian stim­
ulation and thus separate recommendations were in order.
The dosing of natural progesterone has evolved em­
pirically, usually dosages used include: 
50 mg once daily for intramuscular progesterone 
25 mg once daily for subcutaneous progesterone 
90 mg once daily for vaginal progesterone gel 
200 mg three times daily for micronized vaginal pro­
gesterone in-oil capsules 
100 mg two or three times daily for micronized vagi­
nal progesterone in starch suppositories 
400 mg two times daily for vaginal pessary. [2019] 
GPP
Starting progesterone for luteal phase support should 
be in the window between the evening of the day of 
oocyte retrieval and day 3 post oocyte re­
trieval. [2019]
GPP
Progesterone support should be administered until at 
least the day of the pregnancy test. [2019]
GPP
Dydrogesterone is probably recommended for luteal 
phase support. [2019] (Griesinger et al., 2020) 
There are reports on a relation between dydrogesterone exposure 
and the occurrence of congenital malformations. These observed 
relations cannot be translated into a conclusion on causality, and 
therefore are considered as potential associations. 
Conditional 
%%%
The addition of oestradiol to progesterone for luteal 
phase support is probably not recommended. [2019] 
(van der Linden et al., 2015)
Conditional 
%%
In hCG-triggered ovarian stimulation cycles, hCG as lu­
teal phase support in standard dosages of 1500IU is not 
recommended. [updated] (van der Linden et al., 2015)
Strong 
%%
A GnRH agonist bolus, in addition to progesterone for 
luteal phase support in hCG-triggered cycles is prob­
ably not recommended. [updated] (Liu et al., 2022)
Conditional 
%%
Repeated GnRH agonist injections, alone or in addi­
tion to progesterone for luteal phase support in hCG- 
triggered cycles is probably not recommended. 
[reworded] (van der Linden et al., 2015)
Conditional 
%
The addition of LH to progesterone for luteal phase 
support can only be used in the context of a clinical 
trial. [2019]
Research  
only
A GnRH agonist trigger is recommended for final oocyte 
maturation in women at risk of OHSS combined with a 
freeze-all strategy to minimize the risk of severe OHSS. 
[updated] (Babayof et al., 2006; Engmann et al., 2008; 
Humaidan et al., 2013; Youssef et al., 2014; Aflatoonian 
et al., 2018; Santos-Ribeiro et al., 2020)
Strong 
%
If a GnRH agonist protocol with hCG trigger is used in 
high responders, a freeze-all strategy is recommended to 
decrease the risk of late-onset OHSS. [updated]
GPP
The addition of hCG to GnRH agonist as a dual trigger 
for final oocyte maturation is probably not 
recommended for high responders. [2025] (He et al., 
2022; Wang et al., 2024)
Conditional 
%
In patients at risk of OHSS, the use of a GnRH agonist for 
final oocyte maturation is probably recommended over 
hCG in cases where no fresh transfer is performed. 
[2019] (Borges et al., 2016; Tannus et al., 2017)
Conditional 
%
A GnRH agonist trigger for final oocyte maturation with 
or without a freeze-all strategy is preferred over a coast­
ing strategy in patients at risk of OHSS. [2019] (DiLuigi 
et al., 2010; Herrero et al., 2011)
GPP
Dopamine agonists are recommended to decrease the 
risk of early OHSS, particularly in patients receiving hCG 
for final oocyte maturation. [2025] (Tang et al., 2021)
Strong 
%%
A freeze-all strategy is recommended to minimize the 
risk of late-onset OHSS. [updated] (Zaat et al., 2021)
Strong 
%%
Prior to the start of ovarian stimulation, a risk assess­
ment for high response is advised with the purpose of 
applying personalised treatment choices on pituitary 
suppression protocol, FSH dosage, final oocyte matura­
tion trigger, and embryo transfer strategy. [updated]
GPP
506 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

The section on stimulation protocols for high, normal, and 
low responders was also reviewed from a different perspective by 
the GDG. For starters, the GDG wanted to highlight in this 
updated guideline that a conventional gonadotropin dose is 
equivalent to 150–225 IU. Secondly, after much consideration, 
the GDG decided to discard the concept of ‘mild stimulation’ 
from the guideline. Mild stimulation is defined by ICMART as a 
protocol with the intention of limiting the number of oocytes fol­
lowing stimulation for IVF (Zegers-Hochschild et al., 2017). 
However, as it is an intended approach, it is difficult to decide on 
a gonadotropin starting dose to obtain this limited number of 
oocytes. Furthermore, studies published on the topic are very 
heterogeneous, often unclear in methodology, or using a total go­
nadotropin dose that is equivalent to conventional stimulation. 
Comparing and combining these studies to be able to make rele­
vant and evidence-based decisions is therefore not feasible. 
Lastly, dose comparisons of gonadotropins were introduced. In 
the previous version of the guideline, dose comparisons were not 
explicitly presented, and comparisons with higher gonadotropin 
dosages were only included for low responders. It has been made 
clear now that there are limited indications to deviate from con­
ventional gonadotropin dosing.
Several new interventions were added to the chapter on gona­
dotropins, such as follitropin delta, combinations of FSH with 
hMG, and combinations of FSH and hCG. With regard to follitro­
pin delta, there was some discussion about the RCTs comparing 
follitropin delta to follitropin alpha. Some GDG members felt that 
these RCTs included two interventions, i.e. different follitropin 
medications and individualized versus conventional dosing of 
the follitropin medications. Other GDG members disagreed, argu­
ing that, in order to show non-inferiority, the new follitropin 
delta medications, which can only be administered by individual­
ized, algorithm-based dosing, had to be compared to conven­
tional dosing in the control arm. Because of the non-inferiority in 
efficacy outcomes, and improved safety profile in terms of OHSS 
(because of the individualized dosing), a strong recommendation 
in favour of follitropin delta was issued. With regard to the com­
bination of FSH with hMG or hCG, while the GDG understands 
the rationale of adding LH-activity in the mid-follicular phase 
during ovarian stimulation with recombinant human FSH, the 
evidence clearly shows no benefit in terms of (cumulative) live 
birth rates. Therefore, it is not surprising that these combinations 
are not recommended by the GDG.
One completely new key question that was introduced in the 
guideline is the need for hormonal assessment (progesterone, 
oestrogen, or LH) on the day of final oocyte maturation. The GDG 
felt this question was overlooked in the previous version of the 
guideline. The evidence is consistently showing lower live birth 
rates with elevated progesterone, resulting in the expectation of 
a strong recommendation in favour of measuring progesterone 
on the day of final oocyte maturation. However, the GDG felt the 
recommendation had to be very nuanced. For diagnostic tests, 
the GDG feels strongly that unless an intervention or treatment 
is available to rectify the abnormality, the test should not be rec­
ommended. In the case of elevated progesterone levels on the 
day of final oocyte maturation, current evidence shows that the 
reduction in live birth rates is not seen after a frozen embryo 
transfer. However, when considering the freeze-all strategy, sev­
eral factors need to be taken into account, such as the number of 
oocytes, the number of embryos, and embryo quality. Therefore, 
only a conditional (weak) statement was formulated in favour of 
measuring progesterone levels on the day of final oo­
cyte maturation.
Research gaps were detected in several areas, and the top 
three topics are documented in a list of recommendations for 
further research (Supplementary Data File S1).
Despite the limitations of guidelines in general, and the limita­
tions in the evidence supporting the current guideline, the guide­
line group is confident that this document will help best practice 
in ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at Human Reproduction online.
Data availability
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in 
its online supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The Guideline Development Group would like to acknowledge 
the help of many clinicians and professional organizations who 
refereed the content of the guideline and submitted helpful com­
ments to the draft version.
Authors’ roles
FB chaired the GDG and hence fulfilled a leading role in collecting 
the evidence, writing the manuscript, and dealing with reviewer 
comments. NLC, as the methodological expert, performed all lit­
erature searches for the guideline, provided methodological sup­
port, and coordinated the guideline development. All other 
authors, listed in alphabetical order, as GDG members, contrib­
uted equally to the manuscript by drafting key questions, synthe­
sizing evidence, writing different parts of the guideline, and 
discussing recommendations until consensus within the group 
was reached.
Funding
The study has no external funding; all costs for meetings were 
covered by ESHRE.
Conflict of interest
BA reports speaker’s fees from Gedeon-Richter, Ferring, IBSA, 
Intas, Merck, Organon, consulting fees from Merck, Organon, 
Oxolife, stock options from Global Fertility Solutions LLC (em­
ployee co-investment), and was chair of the Turkish Society of 
Reproductive Medicine. EB reports research grants from Roche 
Diagnostics and IBSA, consulting fees from MSD, Abbot, Gedeon- 
Richter, Roche, speaker’s fees from IBSA, MSD, Ferring 
Pharmaceuticals, Abbot, Gedeon-Richter, Merck, Roche, partici­
pation in the advisory board of Ferring Pharmaceuticals, IBSA, 
and Merck, and ownership interest from IVI-RMS Valencia. GG 
was part of the ESHRE working group on Recurrent Implantation 
Failure and the ESHRE working group on clinical KPISs, reports 
travel support from Merck, Organon, Ferring, Theramex, Gedeon- 
Richter, Abbott, consulting fees from Organon, Ferring, Merck, 
Gedeon-Richter, Theramex, Abbott, ReproNovo, Igyxos, OxoLife, 
Philipps, ReprodWissen, PregLem, Guerbet, Roche, IBSA, and 
Besins, speaker’s fees from Organon, Ferring, Merck, Gedeon- 
Richter, Theramex, Abbott, ReproNovo, Igyxos, OxoLife, Philipps, 
ReprodWissen, PregLem, Guerbet, Roche, IBSA, and Besins, and 
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 507  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

research grants from Besin, Merck, Abbott, Ferring, Theramex. 
MG reports speaker’s fees from Merck Serono, Ferring, and 
Gedeon Richter. EK reports travel/hotel expenses from Ferring, 
Merck SERONO, Vianex, speaker’s fees from Ferring, Merck 
SERONO, Vianex, and is chair of the Greek Society of Fertility and 
Sterility. MK reports travel support and speaker’s fees from 
Ferring. ALM reports research grants from Merck, Ferring, IBSA, 
Roche, Organon, Theramex, Beckman Coulter, and Gedeon- 
Richter, consulting fees from Merck, Ferring, IBSA, Roche, 
Organon, Theramex, Beckman Coulter, and Gedeon-Richter, 
speaker’s fees from Merck, Ferring, IBSA, Roche, Organon, 
Theramex, Beckman Coulter, Gedeon-Richter, and participation 
on an advisory board of Merck, Organon, Ferring, Theramex, 
Gedeon Richter, and IBSA. GL reports consulting fees from 
Ferring and Merck, speaker’s fees from Ferring, Merck, Gedeon- 
Richter, Organon, and Vianex, expert testimony fees from Cook, 
travel support from ESHRE, Ferring, Merck, Gedeon-Richter, 
Organon, and Vianex, is on the advisory board of Merck and 
Ferring and participated in an ESHRE committee and on the 
Greek Fertility and Sterility Committee. NM reports research 
grants from IBSA, Organon, consulting fees from Organon, 
Merck, GE, Ferring, Abbott, and Cooper, and speaker’s fees from 
Ferring, GE, Organon, IBSA, Merck, Theramex. NPP reports re­
search grants from Besins Healthcare, Ferring Pharmaceutical, 
Merck Serono, Organon, Roche Diagnostics, and Theramex, con­
sulting fees from Besins Healthcare, Alife, Ferring, IBSA, Merck 
Serono, Organon, Abbott, FertilAI, and speaker’s fees from Besins 
Healthcare, 
Roche 
Diagnostics, 
Ferring 
Pharmaceuticals, 
Gedeon-Richter, IBSA, Merck Serono, Organon, and Theramex. 
SKS reports a research grant from Ferring, travel support from 
Merck and INTAS, consulting fees from Merck, and speaker’s fees 
from Merck, MSD, INTAS, and Ferring. TT reports travel support 
from Merck, speaker’s fees from Merck, Organon, MSD and is 
editor-in-chief of a Bulgarian journal Reproductive Health. MT 
reports travel support from IBSA, Ferring, and Merck, consulting 
fees from Abbott and is a member of the board of Finnish 
Endocrine Society. JU is a member of the Steering Committee of 
Richter Reproduction Network and received travel support from 
IBSA. FB reports a research grant from Besins, is on the advisory 
board of Merck and Abbott, reports speaker’s fees from Ferring, 
Merck, Besins, Intas Fermaceuticals, PREIS School; he is the 
owner of FRANKSCHOOL RforL. The other authors have nothing 
to disclose.
References
Abate A, Brigandi A, Abate FG, Manti F, Unfer V, Perino M. Luteal 
phase support with 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone versus unsup­
ported cycles in in vitro fertilization: a comparative randomized 
study. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1999;48:78–80.
Aboulghar MA, Mansour RT, Serour GI, Al-Inany HG, Amin YM, 
Aboulghar MM. Increasing the dose of human menopausal gona­
dotrophins on day of GnRH antagonist administration: random­
ized controlled trial. Reprod Biomed Online 2004;8:524–527.
Aboulghar MA, Mansour RT, Serour GI, Rhodes CA, Amin YM. 
Reduction of human menopausal gonadotropin dose before 
coasting prevents severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
with minimal cycle cancellation. J Assist Reprod Genet 2000; 
17:298–301.
Acevedo B, Sanchez M, Gomez JL, Cuadros J, Ricciarelli E, Hernandez 
ER. Luteinizing hormone supplementation increases pregnancy 
rates in gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist donor 
cycles. Fertil Steril 2004;82:343–347.
Aflatoonian A, Mansoori-Torshizi M, Farid Mojtahedi M, Aflatoonian 
B, Khalili MA, Amir-Arjmand MH, Soleimani M, Aflatoonian N, 
Oskouian H, Tabibnejad N, et al.; The Fertility Clinic, Skive 
Regional Hospital and Faculty of Health, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Denmark. Fresh versus frozen embryo transfer after 
gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone 
agonist 
trigger 
in 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist cycles among high 
responder women: a randomized, multi-center study. IJRM 2018; 
16:9–18.
Alvarado Franco CA, Bernabeu Garcıa A, Su~nol Sala J, Guerrero 
Villena J, Albero Amoros S, Llacer J, Delgado Navas RA, Ortiz JA, 
Pitas A, Castillo Farfan JC et al. Conventional ovarian stimulation 
vs. delayed single dose corifollitropin alfa ovarian stimulation in 
oocyte donors: a prospective randomized study. Tail trial. Front 
Reprod Health 2023;5:1239175.
Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Alderson P, Dahm P, Falck-Ytter Y, 
Nasser M, Meerpohl J, Post PN, Kunz R et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. 
Going from evidence to recommendations: the significance and 
presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 
66:719–725.
Arce JC, Andersen AN, Fernandez-Sanchez M, Visnova H, Bosch E, 
Garcıa-Velasco JA, Barri P, de Sutter P, Klein BM, Fauser BC. 
Ovarian response to recombinant human follicle-stimulating 
hormone: a randomized, antiM€ullerian hormone-stratified, dose- 
response trial in women undergoing in vitro fertilization/intracy­
toplasmic sperm injection. Fertil Steril 2014;102:1633–1640.e5.
Ataalla W, Elhamid T, Elhalwagy A. Adjuvant sildenafil therapy in 
poor responders undergoing in vitro fertilization: a prospective, 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Middle East 
Fertil Soc J 2016;21:175–179.
Baart EB, Martini E, Eijkemans MJ, Van Opstal D, Beckers NG, 
Verhoeff A, Macklon NS, Fauser BC. Milder ovarian stimulation 
for in-vitro fertilization reduces aneuploidy in the human preim­
plantation embryo: a randomized controlled trial. Hum Reprod 
2007;22:980–988.
Babayof R, Margalioth EJ, Huleihel M, Amash A, Zylber-Haran E, Gal 
M, Brooks B, Mimoni T, Eldar-Geva T. Serum inhibin A, VEGF and 
TNFalpha levels after triggering oocyte maturation with GnRH 
agonist compared with HCG in women with polycystic ovaries 
undergoing IVF treatment: a prospective randomized trial. Hum 
Reprod 2006;21:1260–1265.
Beebeejaun Y, Copeland T, Duffy JMN, Sarris I, Showell M, Wang R, 
Sunkara SK. Triggering oocyte maturation in in vitro fertilization 
treatment in healthy responders: a systematic review and net­
work meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2025;123:812–826.
Beretsos P, Partsinevelos GA, Arabatzi E, Drakakis P, Mavrogianni D, 
Anagnostou E, Stefanidis K, Antsaklis A, Loutradis D. “hCG pri­
ming” effect in controlled ovarian stimulation through a long 
protocol. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2009;7:91.
Blockeel C, Riva A, De Vos M, Haentjens P, Devroey P. Administration 
of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist during the 3 
days before the initiation of the in vitro fertilization/intracyto­
plasmic sperm injection treatment cycle: impact on ovarian 
stimulation. 
A 
pilot 
study. 
Fertil 
Steril 
2011a;95: 
1714–1719. e1711–1712.
Blockeel C, Sterrenburg MD, Broekmans FJ, Eijkemans MJ, Smitz J, 
Devroey P, Fauser BC. Follicular phase endocrine characteristics 
during ovarian stimulation and GnRH antagonist cotreatment 
for IVF: RCT comparing recFSH initiated on cycle day 2 or 5. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2011b;96:1122–1128.
Bodri D, Sunkara SK, Coomarasamy A. Gonadotropin-releasing hor­
mone agonists versus antagonists for controlled ovarian hyper­
stimulation in oocyte donors: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Fertil Steril 2011;95:164–169.
508 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Boots CE, Meister M, Cooper AR, Hardi A, Jungheim ES. Ovarian stim­
ulation in the luteal phase: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Assist Reprod Genet 2016;33:971–980.
Bordewijk EM, Mol F, van der Veen F, Van Wely M. Required amount 
of rFSH, HP-hMG and HP-FSH to reach a live birth: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Open 2019;2019:hoz008.
Borges E, Jr., Braga DP, Setti AS, Vingris LS, Figueira RC, Iaconelli A. 
Jr., Strategies for the management of OHSS: Results from 
freezing-all cycles. JBRA Assist Reprod 2016;20:8–12.
Boudry L, Mateizel I, Wouters K, Papaleo E, Mackens S, De Vos M, 
Racca A, Adriaenssens T, Tournaye H, Blockeel C. Does dual oo­
cyte retrieval with continuous FSH administration increase the 
number of mature oocytes in low responders? An open-label ran­
domized controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2024;39:538–547.
Broekmans FJ, Kwee J, Hendriks DJ, Mol BW, Lambalk CB. A system­
atic review of tests predicting ovarian reserve and IVF outcome. 
Hum Reprod Update 2006;12:685–718.
Broer SL, Dolleman M, van Disseldorp J, Broeze KA, Opmeer BC, 
Bossuyt PM, Eijkemans MJ, Mol BW, Broekmans FJ; IPD-EXPORT 
Study Group Prediction of an excessive response in in vitro fertili­
zation from patient characteristics and ovarian reserve tests and 
comparison in subgroups: an individual patient data meta- 
analysis. Fertil Steril 2013a;100:420–429.e7. e427.
Broer SL, van Disseldorp J, Broeze KA, Dolleman M, Opmeer BC, 
Bossuyt P, Eijkemans MJC, Mol B-WJ, Broekmans FJM, Broer SL, et 
al.; on behalf of the IMPORT Study Group. Added value of ovarian 
reserve testing on patient characteristics in the prediction of 
ovarian response and ongoing pregnancy: an individual patient 
data approach. Hum Reprod Update 2013b;19:26–36.
B€ulow NS, Skouby SO, Warzecha AK, Udengaard H, Andersen CY, 
Holt MD, Grøndahl ML, Nyboe Andersen A, Sopa N, Mikkelsen 
ALE et al. Impact of letrozole co-treatment during ovarian stimu­
lation with gonadotrophins for IVF: a multicentre, randomized, 
double-blinded placebo-controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2022; 
37:309–321.
Casano S, Guidetti D, Patriarca A, Pittatore G, Gennarelli G, Revelli A. 
MILD ovarian stimulation with GnRH-antagonist vs. long proto­
col with low dose FSH for non-PCO high responders undergoing 
IVF: a prospective, randomized study including thawing cycles. J 
Assist Reprod Genet 2012;29:1343–1351.
Cedrin-Durnerin I, Bstandig B, Herve F, Wolf J, Uzan M, Hugues J. A 
comparative study of high fixed-dose and decremental-dose regi­
mens of gonadotropins in a minidose gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agonist flare protocol for poor responders. Fertil Steril 
2000;73:1055–1056.
Cerrillo M, Cecchino GN, Toribio M, Garcıa-Rubio MJ, Garcıa-Velasco 
JA. A randomized, non-inferiority trial on the DuoStim strategy 
in PGT-A cycles. Reprod Biomed Online 2023;46:536–542.
Chen CN, Chang LT, Chen CH, Tam KW. Fertility preservation for 
women with breast cancer before chemotherapy: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2022;44:357–369.
Chen Y, Zhang Y, Hu M, Liu X, Qi H. Timing of human chorionic go­
nadotropin (hCG) hormone administration in IVF/ICSI protocols 
using GnRH agonist or antagonists: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Gynecol Endocrinol 2014;30:431–437.
Conforti A, Esteves SC, Humaidan P, Longobardi S, D’Hooghe T, 
Orvieto R, Vaiarelli A, Cimadomo D, Rienzi L, Ubaldi FM et al. 
Recombinant human luteinizing hormone co-treatment in ovar­
ian stimulation for assisted reproductive technology in women 
of advanced reproductive age: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 
2021;19:91.
Cozzolino M, Vitagliano A, Cecchino GN, Ambrosini G, Garcia- 
Velasco JA. Corifollitropin alfa for ovarian stimulation in in vitro 
fertilization: a systematic review and meta-analysis of random­
ized controlled trials. Fertil Steril 2019;111:722–733.
Cruz M, Alama P, Mu~noz M, Collado D, Blanes C, Solbes E, Requena 
A. Economic impact of ovarian stimulation with corifollitropin 
alfa versus conventional daily gonadotropins in oocyte donors: a 
randomized study. Reprod Biomed Online 2017;34:605–610.
Dastjerdi MV, Ansaripour S, Ataei M, Gharedaghi R, Hoseini SMM, 
Mohazzab A, Zafardoust S. Comparison of luteal phase stimula­
tion with follicular phase stimulation in poor ovarian response: a 
single-blinded randomized controlled trial. Contracept Reprod Med 
2024;9:6.
Datta AK, Maheshwari A, Felix N, Campbell S, Nargund G. Mild ver­
sus conventional ovarian stimulation for IVF in poor, normal and 
hyper-responders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum 
Reprod Update 2021;27:229–253.
De Marco MP, Montanari G, Ruscito I, Giallonardo A, Ubaldi FM, 
Rienzi L, Costanzi F, Caserta D, Schimberni M, Schimberni M. 
Natural cycle results in lower implantation failure than ovarian 
stimulation in advanced-age poor responders undergoing IVF: 
Fertility Outcomes from 585 Patients. Reprod Sci 2021; 
28:1967–1973.
De Rijdt S, Illingworth K, De Munck N, Tournaye H, Mackens S, De 
Vos M, Blockeel C. Early versus late follicular phase ovarian stim­
ulation: a randomized controlled trial. Reprod Biomed Online 2024; 
49:103889.
Decleer W, Comhaire F, Balduyck J, Ameye A, Osmanagaoglu K, 
Devroey P. Replacing HMG/FSH by low-dose HCG to complete 
corifollitropin alfa stimulation reduces cost per clinical preg­
nancy: a randomized pragmatic trial. Reprod Biomed Online 2020; 
40:468–474.
DiLuigi AJ, Engmann L, Schmidt DW, Maier DB, Nulsen JC, Benadiva 
CA. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist to induce final oo­
cyte maturation prevents the development of ovarian hypersti­
mulation syndrome in high-risk patients and leads to improved 
clinical outcomes compared with coasting. Fertil Steril 2010; 
94:1111–1114.
Doody K, Devroey P, Gordon K, Witjes H, Mannaerts B. LH concentra­
tions do not correlate with pregnancy in rFSH/GnRH antagonist 
cycles. Reprod Biomed Online 2010;20:565–567.
Duijkers IJ, Vemer HM, Hollanders JM, Willemsen WN, Bastiaans LA, 
Hamilton CJ, Thomas CM, Borm GF. Different follicle stimulating 
hormone/luteinizing hormone ratios for ovarian stimulation. 
Hum Reprod 1993;8:1387–1391.
Eftekhar M, Bagheri RB, Neghab N, Hosseinisadat R. Evaluation of 
pretreatment with Cetrotide in an antagonist protocol for 
patients with PCOS undergoing IVF/ICSI cycles: a randomized 
clinical trial. JBRA Assist Reprod 2018;22:238–243.
Eftekhar M, Saeed L. Effect of adding letrozole to gonadotropin on 
in vitro fertilization outcomes: an RCT. Int J Reprod Biomed 2020; 
18:287–294.
Engmann L, DiLuigi A, Schmidt D, Nulsen J, Maier D, Benadiva C. The 
use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist to induce 
oocyte maturation after cotreatment with GnRH antagonist in 
high-risk patients undergoing in vitro fertilization prevents the 
risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a prospective ran­
domized controlled study. Fertil Steril 2008;89:84–91.
Farquhar C, Rombauts L, Kremer JA, Lethaby A, Ayeleke RO. Oral 
contraceptive pill, progestogen or oestrogen pretreatment for 
ovarian stimulation protocols for women undergoing assisted re­
productive techniques. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 
5:Cd006109.
Ferraretti AP, Gianaroli L, Motrenko T, Feliciani E, Tabanelli C, Magli 
MC. LH pretreatment as a novel strategy for poor responders. 
Biomed Res Int 2014;2014:926172.
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 509  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Gambini S, Sonigo C, Robin G, Cedrin-Durnerin I, Vinolas C, Sifer C, 
Boumerdassi Y, Mayeur A, Gallot V, Grynberg M et al. Risk factors 
for poor oocyte yield and oocyte immaturity after GnRH agonist 
triggering. Hum Reprod 2024;39:963–973.
Gao G, Cui X, Li S, Ding P, Zhang S, Zhang Y. Endometrial thickness 
and IVF cycle outcomes: a meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 
2020;40:124–133.
Ghasemi Tehrani H, Aasasi K, Mardanian F, Mehrabian F, Movahedi 
M, Naghshineh E. Evaluation of the effect of letrozole in the ovar­
ian hyperstimulation syndrome prevention in participants at risk 
of treatment with ovulation-stimulating drugs: a randomized 
controlled trial. Rep Biochem Mol Biol 2022;11:386–393.
Glujovsky D, Pesce R, Miguens M, Sueldo C, Ciapponi A; Cochrane 
Gynaecology and Fertility Group Progestogens for prevention of 
luteinising hormone (LH) surge in women undergoing controlled 
ovarian hyperstimulation as part of an assisted reproductive 
technology (ART) cycle. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2023;11:CD013827
Golan A, Herman A, Soffer Y, Bukovsky I, Ron-El R. Ultrasonic con­
trol without hormone determination for ovulation induction in 
in-vitro fertilization/embryo transfer with gonadotrophin- 
releasing hormone analogue and human menopausal gonado­
trophin. Hum Reprod 1994;9:1631–1633.
Gong Y, Luo S, Fan P, Jin S, Zhu H, Deng T, Quan Y, Huang W. Growth 
hormone alleviates oxidative stress and improves oocyte quality 
in Chinese women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a random­
ized controlled trial. Sci Rep 2020;10:18769.
Griesinger G, Blockeel C, Kahler E, Pexman-Fieth C, Olofsson JI, 
Driessen S, Tournaye H. Dydrogesterone as an oral alternative to 
vaginal progesterone for IVF luteal phase support: A systematic 
review and individual participant data meta-analysis. PLoS One 
2020;15:e0241044.
Griesinger G, Verweij PJ, Gates D, Devroey P, Gordon K, Stegmann BJ, 
Tarlatzis BC. Prediction of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in 
patients treated with corifollitropin alfa or rFSH in a GnRH antag­
onist protocol. PLoS One 2016;11:e0149615.
Guerrero J, Castillo JC, Ten J, Ortiz JA, Lledo B, Orozco D, Quereda F, 
Bernabeu A, Bernabeu R. Random-start ovarian stimulation in an 
oocyte donation programme: a large, single-centre, experience. 
Reprod Biomed Online 2024;48:103572.
He FF, Hu W, Yong L, Li YM. Triggering of ovulation for GnRH- 
antagonist cycles in normal and low ovarian responders under­
going IVF/ICSI: A systematic review and meta-analysis of ran­
domized trials. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2023;289:65–73.
He Y, Tang Y, Chen S, Liu J, Liu H. Effect of GnRH agonist alone or 
combined with different low-dose hCG on cumulative live birth 
rate for high responders in GnRH antagonist cycles: a retrospec­
tive study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2022;22:172.
Herrero L, Pareja S, Losada C, Cobo AC, Pellicer A, Garcia-Velasco JA. 
Avoiding the use of human chorionic gonadotropin combined 
with oocyte vitrification and GnRH agonist triggering versus 
coasting: a new strategy to avoid ovarian hyperstimulation syn­
drome. Fertil Steril 2011;95:1137–1140.
Herzberger EH, Knaneh S, Amir H, Reches A, Ben-Yosef D, Kalma Y, 
Azem F, Samara N. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
versus recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin triggering in 
fertility preservation cycles. Reprod Sci 2021;28:3390–3396.
Hohmann F, Macklon N, Fauser B. A randomized comparison of two 
ovarian stimulation protocols with gonadotropin-releasing hor­
mone (GnRH) antagonist cotreatment for in vitro fertilization 
commencing recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone on cycle 
day 2 or 5 with the standard long GnRH agonist protocol. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:166–173.
Hong YH, Kim SK, Lee JR, Jee BC, Suh CS. Clinical efficacy of dual trig­
ger with human chorionic gonadotropin and a gonadotropin- 
releasing hormone agonist for women undergoing fertility pres­
ervation. Reprod Med Biol 2022;21:e12440.
Huang L, Gao Y, Liang S, Jiang M. Administration of dehydroepian­
drosterone improves endometrial thickness in women undergo­
ing IVF/ICSI: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Ovarian Res 
2025;18:35.
Humaidan P, Chin W, Rogoff D, D’Hooghe T, Longobardi S, Hubbard 
J, Schertz J. Efficacy and safety of follitropin alfa/lutropin alfa in 
ART: a randomized controlled trial in poor ovarian responders. 
Hum Reprod 2017;32:1537–1538.
Humaidan P, Polyzos NP, Alsbjerg B, Erb K, Mikkelsen AL, Elbaek HO, 
Papanikolaou EG, Andersen CY. GnRHa trigger and individual­
ized luteal phase hCG support according to ovarian response to 
stimulation: two prospective randomized controlled multi- 
centre studies in IVF patients. Hum Reprod 2013;28:2511–2521.
Hurd WW, Randolph JF, Jr., Christman GM, Ansbacher R, Menge AC, 
Gell JS. Luteal support with both estradiol and progesterone after 
clomiphene citrate stimulation for in vitro fertilization. Fertil 
Steril 1996;66:587–592.
Ishihara O, Klein BM, Arce JC; Japanese Follitropin Delta Phase 2 
Trial 
Group. 
Randomized, 
assessor-blind, 
antiM€ullerian 
hormone-stratified, dose-response trial in Japanese in vitro fertil­
ization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection patients undergoing 
controlled ovarian stimulation with follitropin delta. Fertil Steril 
2021;115:1478–1486.
Kansal Kalra S, Ratcliffe S, Gracia CR, Martino L, Coutifaris C, 
Barnhart KT. Randomized controlled pilot trial of luteal phase re­
combinant FSH stimulation in poor responders. Reprod Biomed 
Online 2008;17:745–750.
Karatasiou GI, Bosdou JK, Venetis CA, Zepiridis L, Chatzimeletiou K, 
Tarlatzi TB, Lainas G, Tarlatzis BC, Grimbizis G, Kolibianakis EM. 
Is the probability of pregnancy after ovarian stimulation for IVF 
associated with serum estradiol levels on the day of triggering fi­
nal oocyte maturation with hCG? A systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Assist Reprod Genet 2020;37:1531–1541.
Kasius A, Smit JG, Torrance HL, Eijkemans MJ, Mol BW, Opmeer BC, 
Broekmans FJ. Endometrial thickness and pregnancy rates after 
IVF: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update 
2014;20:530–541.
Keskin M, Ecemis¸ T, Atik A, Yegen P, Kalkan E, Y€ucel GS. Cycle out­
comes of dual trigger (GnRH agonistþhCG) versus human chori­
onic gonadotropin trigger alone in POSEDION group 3-4 poor- 
responders and normo-responders: A prospective randomized 
study. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 2023;52:102633.
Kim CH, Kim SR, Cheon YP, Kim SH, Chae HD, Kang BM. Minimal 
stimulation using gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) an­
tagonist and recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone 
versus GnRH antagonist multiple-dose protocol in low respond­
ers undergoing in vitro fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm in­
jection. Fertil Steril 2009;92:2082–2084.
Kim SJ, Kim TH, Park JK, Eum JH, Lee WS, Lyu SW. Effect of a dual 
trigger on oocyte maturation in young women with decreased 
ovarian reserve for the purpose of elective oocyte cryopreserva­
tion. Clin Exp Reprod Med 2020;47:306–311.
Koichi K, Yukiko N, Shima K, Sachiko S. Efficacy of low-dose human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in a GnRH antagonist protocol. J 
Assist Reprod Genet 2006;23:223–228.
Kolibianakis EM, Papanikolaou EG, Tournaye H, Camus M, Van 
Steirteghem AC, Devroey P. Triggering final oocyte maturation 
using different doses of human chorionic gonadotropin: a ran­
domized pilot study in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome 
treated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonists and 
510 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone. Fertil Steril 2007; 
88:1382–1388.
Kucuk T, Goktolga U, Sozen E. Efficiency of follicle-stimulating hor­
mone, commenced in the luteal phase, for overcoming a poor re­
sponse in assisted reproduction. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2008; 
34:574–577.
Kummer NE, Feinn RS, Griffin DW, Nulsen JC, Benadiva CA, 
Engmann LL. Predicting successful induction of oocyte matura­
tion after gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) trig­
ger. Hum Reprod 2013;28:152–159.
Kwan I, Bhattacharya S, Woolner A. Monitoring of stimulated cycles 
in assisted reproduction (IVF and ICSI). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2021;4:Cd005289.
Lawrenz B, Coughlan C, Melado L, Digma S, Sibal J, Jean A, Fatemi 
HM. Step-down of FSH- dosage during ovarian stimulation - basic 
lessons to be learnt from a randomized controlled trial. Front 
Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2021;12:661707.
Lim YC, Hamdan M, Maheshwari A, Cheong Y. Progesterone level in 
assisted reproductive technology: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Sci Rep 2024;14:30826.
Liu C, Tian T, Lou Y, Li J, Liu P, Li R, Qiao J, Wang Y, Yang R. Live birth 
rate of gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist versus luteal 
phase gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist protocol in IVF/ 
ICSI: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Expert Rev Mol Med 
2023a;26:e2.
Liu Y, Ding F, Yang Y, Ma B. Growth hormone improves the preg­
nancy outcomes in poor ovarian responders undergoing in vitro 
fertilization: an umbrella review. J Assist Reprod Genet 2025; 
42:721–736.
Liu Y, Pan Z, Wu Y, Song J, Chen J. Comparison of anti-M€ullerian hor­
mone and antral follicle count in the prediction of ovarian re­
sponse: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Ovarian Res 
2023b;16:117.
Liu Y, Wu Y, Pan Z, Jiang F, Lu Y, Meng Y. Single-dose versus 
multiple-dose GnRH agonist for luteal-phase support in women 
undergoing IVF/ICSI cycles: a network meta-analysis of random­
ized controlled trials. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2022;13:802688.
Liu Z, Wang KH. Effect of basal luteinizing hormone (bLH) level on 
in vitro fertilization/intra-cytoplasmic injections (IVF/ICSI) out­
comes in polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) patients. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth 2023;23:618.
Lotfy M, Saleh MM, Elshahat AM, Elserour GA, Taha OT. 
Gonadotropins- letrozole, gonadotropin- clomiphene citrate, and 
gonadotropins only for controlled ovarian super stimulation in 
women with polycystic ovary syndrome undergoing intracyto­
plasmic 
sperm 
injection. 
J 
Pharm 
Negat 
Results 
2022; 
13:4568–4576.
Lou HY, Huang XY. Modified natural cycle for in vitro fertilization 
and embryo transfer in normal ovarian responders. J Int Med Res 
2010;38:2070–2076.
Lu X, Hong Q, Sun L, Chen Q, Fu Y, Ai A, Lyu Q, Kuang Y. Dual trigger 
for final oocyte maturation improves the oocyte retrieval rate of 
suboptimal responders to gonadotropin-releasing hormone ago­
nist. Fertil Steril 2016;106:1356–1362.
Luo X, Deng B, Li L, Ma R, Mai X, Wu Z. LH level on ovulation trigger 
day has a different impact on the outcomes of agonist and antag­
onist regimens during in vitro fertilization. J Ovarian Res 2023; 
16:26.
Madani T, Mohammadi Yeganeh L, Ezabadi Z, Hasani F, Chehrazi M. 
Comparing the efficacy of urinary and recombinant hCG on oo­
cyte/follicle ratio to trigger ovulation in women undergoing intra­
cytoplasmic sperm injection cycles: a randomized controlled 
trial. J Assist Reprod Genet 2013;30:239–245.
Madani T, Mohammadi Yeganeh L, Khodabakhshi S, Akhoond MR, 
Hasani F. Efficacy of low dose hCG on oocyte maturity for ovarian 
stimulation in poor responder women undergoing intracytoplas­
mic sperm injection cycle: a randomized controlled trial. J Assist 
Reprod Genet 2012;29:1213–1220.
Martin JR, Mahutte NG, Arici A, Sakkas D. Impact of duration and 
dose of gonadotrophins on IVF outcomes. Reprod Biomed Online 
2006;13:645–650.
Martinez F, Clua E, Roca M, Garcia S, Polyzos NP. Comparison of blas­
tocyst euploidy rates following luteal versus follicular phase 
stimulation in a GnRH antagonist protocol: a prospective study 
with repeated ovarian stimulation cycles. Hum Reprod 2022; 
37:2777–2786.
Martinez F, Racca A, Rodrıguez I, Polyzos NP. Ovarian stimulation 
for oocyte donation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum 
Reprod Update 2021;27:673–696.
Maslow BL, Guarnaccia M, Stefanacci C, Ramirez L, Klein JU. The use 
of GnRH-agonist trigger for the final maturation of oocytes in 
normal and low responders undergoing planned oocyte cryopres­
ervation. Hum Reprod 2020;35:1054–1060.
Massarotti C, Stigliani S, Gazzo I, Lambertini M, Anserini P. Long-act­
ing gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist trigger in fertility 
preservation cycles before chemotherapy. ESMO Open 2023; 
8:101597.
Massin N, Abdennebi I, Porcu-Buisson G, Chevalier N, Descat E, 
Pietin-Vialle C, Goro S, Brussieux M, Pinto M, Pasquier M et al. The 
BISTIM study: a randomized controlled trial comparing dual 
ovarian stimulation (duostim) with two conventional ovarian 
stimulations in poor ovarian responders undergoing IVF. Hum 
Reprod 2023;38:927–937.
Mathur RS, Akande AV, Keay SD, Hunt LP, Jenkins JM. Distinction be­
tween early and late ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Fertil 
Steril 2000;73:901–907.
Melo M, Bellver J, Garrido N, Meseguer M, Pellicer A, Remohı J. A pro­
spective, randomized, controlled trial comparing three different 
gonadotropin regimens in oocyte donors: ovarian response, 
in vitro fertilization outcome, and analysis of cost minimization. 
Fertil Steril 2010;94:958–964.
Mochtar MH, Danhof NA, Ayeleke RO, Van der Veen F, van Wely M. 
Recombinant luteinizing hormone (rLH) and recombinant follicle 
stimulating hormone (rFSH) for ovarian stimulation in IVF/ICSI 
cycles. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;5:Cd005070.
Mohammadi S, Eini F, Bazarganipour F, Taghavi SA, Kutenaee MA. 
The effect of Myo-inositol on fertility rates in poor ovarian re­
sponder in women undergoing assisted reproductive technique: 
a randomized clinical trial. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2021;19:61.
Montoya-Botero P, Drakopoulos P, Gonzalez-Foruria I, Polyzos NP. 
Fresh and cumulative live birth rates in mild versus conventional 
stimulation for IVF cycles in poor ovarian responders: a system­
atic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Open 2021; 
2021:hoaa066.
Morgia F, Sbracia M, Schimberni M, Giallonardo A, Piscitelli C, 
Giannini P, Aragona C. A controlled trial of natural cycle versus 
microdose gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog flare cycles 
in poor responders undergoing in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 
2004;81:1542–1547.
Mukherjee S, Sharma S, Chakravarty BN. Letrozole in a low-cost 
in vitro fertilization protocol in intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
cycles for male factor infertility: A randomized controlled trial. J 
Hum Reprod Sci 2012;5:170–174.
Naik S, Lepine S, Nagels HE, Siristatidis CS, Kroon B, McDowell S. 
Androgens (dehydroepiandrosterone or testosterone) for women 
undergoing assisted reproduction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2024;6:Cd009749.
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 511  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Nazari L, Salehpour S, Hosseini S, Saharkhiz N, Azizi E, Hashemi T, 
Ghodssi-Ghassemabadi R. Effect of myo-inositol supplementa­
tion on ICSI outcomes among poor ovarian responder patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 2020; 
49:101698.
Ngwenya O, Lensen SF, Vail A, Mol BWJ, Broekmans FJ, Wilkinson J. 
Individualised gonadotropin dose selection using markers of 
ovarian reserve for women undergoing in vitro fertilisation plus 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (IVF/ICSI). Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2024;1:Cd012693.
Oudendijk JF, Yarde F, Eijkemans MJ, Broekmans FJ, Broer SL. The 
poor responder in IVF: is the prognosis always poor?: a system­
atic review. Hum Reprod Update 2012;18:1–11.
Oudshoorn SC, van Tilborg TC, Eijkemans MJC, Oosterhuis GJE, 
Friederich J, van Hooff MHA, van Santbrink EJP, Brinkhuis EA, 
Smeenk JMJ, Kwee J, et al.; OPTIMIST Study Group. Individualized 
versus standard FSH dosing in women starting IVF/ICSI: an RCT. 
Part 2: The predicted hyper responder. Hum Reprod 2017; 
32:2506–2514.
Pacchiarotti A, Sbracia M, Frega A, Selman H, Rinaldi L, Pacchiarotti 
A. Urinary hMG (Meropur) versus recombinant FSH plus recom­
binant LH (Pergoveris) in IVF: a multicenter, prospective, ran­
domized controlled trial. Fertil Steril 2010;94:2467–2469.
Papanikolaou EG, Pozzobon C, Kolibianakis EM, Camus M, Tournaye 
H, Fatemi HM, Van Steirteghem A, Devroey P. Incidence and pre­
diction of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in women under­
going gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist in vitro 
fertilization cycles. Fertil Steril 2006;85:112–120.
Parsanezhad M, Jahromi B, Rezaee S, Kooshesh L, Alaee S. The effect 
of four different gonadotropin protocols on oocyte and embryo 
quality and pregnancy outcomes in IVF/ICSI cycles; a random­
ized controlled trial. Iran J Med Sci 2017;42:57–65.
Pereira N, Voskuilen-Gonzalez A, Hancock K, Lekovich JP, 
Schattman GL, Rosenwaks Z. Random-start ovarian stimulation 
in women desiring elective cryopreservation of oocytes. Reprod 
Biomed Online 2017;35:400–406.
Popovic-Todorovic B, Santos-Ribeiro S, Drakopoulos P, De Vos M, 
Racca A, Mackens S, Thorrez Y, Verheyen G, Tournaye H, 
Quintero L et al. Predicting suboptimal oocyte yield following 
GnRH agonist trigger by measuring serum LH at the start of ovar­
ian stimulation. Hum Reprod 2019;34:2027–2035.
Qin N, Chen Q, Hong Q, Cai R, Gao H, Wang Y, Sun L, Zhang S, Guo H, 
Fu Y et al. Flexibility in starting ovarian stimulation at different 
phases of the menstrual cycle for treatment of infertile women 
with the use of in vitro fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm in­
jection. Fertil Steril 2016;106:334–341.e1. e331.
Qin Y. Effects of using letrozole in combination with the GnRH an­
tagonist protocol for patients with poor ovarian response: a 
meta-analysis. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 2021;50:102139.
Revelli A, Gennarelli G, Sestero M, Canosa S, Carosso A, Salvagno F, 
Pittatore G, Filippini C, Benedetto C. A prospective randomized 
trial comparing corifollitropin-α late-start (day 4) versus stan­
dard administration (day 2) in expected poor, normal, and high 
responders undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation for IVF. J 
Assist Reprod Genet 2020;37:1163–1170.
Rodgers RJ, Reid GD, Koch J, Deans R, Ledger WL, Friedlander M, 
Gilchrist RB, Walters KA, Abbott JA. The safety and efficacy of 
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for fertility preservation in 
women with early breast cancer: a systematic review. Hum 
Reprod 2017;32:1033–1045.
Rombauts L, Suikkari AM, MacLachlan V, Trounson AO, Healy DL. 
Recruitment of follicles by recombinant human follicle- 
stimulating hormone commencing in the luteal phase of the 
ovarian cycle. Fertil Steril 1998;69:665–669.
Saharkhiz N, Salehpoor S, Hosseini S, Nazari L, Sheibani S, 
Doohandeh T. Comparison in vitro fertilization outcomes be­
tween DouStim and minimal stimulation protocols in poor ovar­
ian responders: a randomized clinical trial. Int J Fertil Steril 2024; 
18:135–139.
Santos-Ribeiro S, Mackens S, Popovic-Todorovic B, Racca A, Polyzos 
NP, Van Landuyt L, Drakopoulos P, de Vos M, Tournaye H, 
Blockeel C. The freeze-all strategy versus agonist triggering with 
low-dose hCG for luteal phase support in IVF/ICSI for high res­
ponders: a randomized controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2020; 
35:2808–2818.
Serafini P, Yadid I, Motta EL, Alegretti JR, Fioravanti J, Coslovsky M. 
Ovarian stimulation with daily late follicular phase administra­
tion of low-dose human chorionic gonadotropin for in vitro fertil­
ization: a prospective, randomized trial. Fertil Steril 2006; 
86:830–838.
Seyedoshohadaei F, Abbasi S, Rezaie M, Allahvaisi A, Jafar Rezaie M, 
Soufizadeh N, Rahmani K. Myo-inositol effect on pregnancy out­
comes in infertile women undergoing in vitro fertilization/intra­
cytoplasmic sperm injection: A double-blind RCT. Int J Reprod 
Biomed 2022;20:643–650.
Shaltout A, Eid M, Shohayeb A. Does triggering ovulation by 5000 IU 
of uhCG affect ICSI outcome? Middle East Fertil Soc J 2006; 
11:99–103.
Showell MG, Mackenzie-Proctor R, Jordan V, Hodgson R, Farquhar C; 
Cochrane Gynaecology and Fertility Group. Inositol for subfertile 
women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2018;2018:CD012378
Shu L, Xu Q, Meng Q, Dai X, Zhang Y, Zhou W, Yi H, Liu J, Wu C, Hou 
Z et al. Clinical outcomes following long GnRHa ovarian stimula­
tion with highly purified human menopausal gonadotropin plus 
rFSH or rFSH in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization-embryo 
transfer: a multi-center randomized controlled trial. Ann Transl 
Med 2019;7:146.
Siristatidis C, Stavros S, Dafopoulos K, Sergentanis T, Domali E, 
Drakakis P, Loutradis D. A randomized controlled trial on the effi­
cacy and safety of low-dose hCG in a short protocol with GnRH 
agonist and ovarian stimulation with recombinant FSH (rFSH) 
during the follicular phase in infertile women undergoing ART. 
Reprod Sci 2022;29:497–505.
Siristatidis CS, Basios G, Pergialiotis V, Vogiatzi P. Aspirin for in vitro 
fertilisation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;11:CD004832.
Siristatidis CS, Yong LN, Maheshwari A, Ray Chaudhuri Bhatta S. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist protocols for pituitary 
suppression in assisted reproduction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2025;1:Cd006919.
S€oderstr€om-Anttila V, Foudila T, Hovatta O. A randomized compara­
tive study of highly purified follicle stimulating hormone and hu­
man menopausal gonadotrophin for ovarian hyperstimulation in 
an oocyte donation programme. Hum Reprod 1996;11:1864–1870.
S€onmezer M, S¸€uk€ur YE, Ates¸ C, Sac¸ıntı KG, S€onmezer M, Aslan B, 
Atabekoglu CS, €Ozmen B, Oktay KH. Random start ovarian stimu­
lation before gonadotoxic therapies in women with cancer: a sys­
tematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2023; 
47:103337.
Sood A, Mohiyiddeen G, Ahmad G, Fitzgerald C, Watson A, 
Mohiyiddeen L. Growth hormone for in vitro fertilisation (IVF). 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2021;11:CD000099.
Steward RG, Lan L, Shah AA, Yeh JS, Price TM, Goldfarb JM, Muasher 
SJ. Oocyte number as a predictor for ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome and live birth: an analysis of 256,381 in vitro fertiliza­
tion cycles. Fertil Steril 2014;101:967–973.
Sun L, Ye J, Wang Y, Chen Q, Cai R, Fu Y, Tian H, Lyu Q, Lu X, Kuang 
Y. Elevated basal luteinizing hormone does not impair the 
512 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

outcome of human menopausal gonadotropin and medroxypro­
gesterone acetate treatment cycles. Sci Rep 2018;8:13835.
Su~nol J, Castillo JC, Ortiz JA, Ten J, Fuentes A, Moliner B, Martınez M, 
Llacer J, Guerrero J, Pitas A et al. Conventional follicular-phase 
ovarian stimulation vs. luteal-phase stimulation in suboptimal 
responders: a randomized controlled trial. F S Rep 2023; 
4:344–352.
Tang H, Mourad SM, Wang A, Zhai SD, Hart RJ. Dopamine agonists 
for preventing ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2021;4:Cd008605.
Tannus S, Turki R, Cohen Y, Son WY, Shavit T, Dahan MH. 
Reproductive outcomes after a single dose of gonadotropin- 
releasing hormone agonist compared with human chorionic go­
nadotropin for the induction of final oocyte maturation in hyper- 
responder women aged 35–40 years. Fertil Steril 2017;107: 
1323–1328.e2. e1322.
Taronger R, Martınez-Cuenca S, Ferreros I, Rubio JM, Fernandez- 
Colom PJ, Martınez-Triguero ML, Pellicer A. Ovarian stimulation 
with corifollitropin alfa followed by hp-hMG compared to hp- 
hMG in patients at risk of poor ovarian response undergoing ICSI: 
a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2018; 
231:192–197.
Tesarik J, Mendoza C. Effects of exogenous LH administration during 
ovarian stimulation of pituitary down-regulated young oocyte 
donors on oocyte yield and developmental competence. Human 
Reproduction (Oxford, England) 2002;17:3129–3137.
Thuesen LL, Loft A, Egeberg AN, Smitz J, Petersen JH, Andersen AN. 
A randomized controlled dose-response pilot study of addition of 
hCG to recombinant FSH during controlled ovarian stimulation 
for in vitro fertilization. Hum Reprod 2012;27:3074–3084.
Tshzmachyan R, Hambartsoumian E. The role of Letrozole (LE) in 
controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) in patients at high risk to 
develop ovarian hyper stimulation syndrome (OHSS). A prospec­
tive randomized controlled pilot study. J Gynecol Obstet Hum 
Reprod 2020;49:101643.
Tso LO, Costello MF, Albuquerque LET, Andriolo RB, Macedo CR. 
Metformin treatment before and during IVF or ICSI in women 
with polycystic ovary syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020; 
12:CD006105.
Vaiarelli A, Cimadomo D, Ruffa A, Rania E, Pittana E, Gallo C, 
Fiorenza A, Alviggi E, Alfano S, Carmelo R et al. Oocyte compe­
tence is comparable between progestin primed ovarian stimula­
tion with Norethisterone acetate (NETA-PPOS) and GnRH- 
antagonist protocols: A matched case-control study in PGT-A 
cycles. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2024;294:4–10.
van der Linden M, Buckingham K, Farquhar C, Kremer JA, Metwally 
M. Luteal phase support for assisted reproduction cycles. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2015:CD009154.
van Hooff MH, Alberda AT, Huisman GJ, Zeilmaker GH, Leerentveld 
RA. Doubling the human menopausal gonadotrophin dose in the 
course of an in-vitro fertilization treatment cycle in low respond­
ers: a randomized study. Hum Reprod 1993;8:369–373.
van Wely M, Kwan I, Burt AL, Thomas J, Vail A, Van der Veen F, Al- 
Inany HG. Recombinant versus urinary gonadotrophin for ovar­
ian stimulation in assisted reproductive technology cycles. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;2011:CD005354.
Venetis CA, Kolibianakis EM, Bosdou JK, Tarlatzis BC. Progesterone 
elevation and probability of pregnancy after IVF: a systematic re­
view and meta-analysis of over 60 000 cycles. Hum Reprod Update 
2013;19:433–457.
Venetis CA, Storr A, Chua SJ, Mol BW, Longobardi S, Yin X, D’Hooghe 
T. What is the optimal GnRH antagonist protocol for ovarian 
stimulation during ART treatment? A systematic review and net­
work meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update 2023;29:307–326.
Vermeulen N, Le Clef N, Mcheik S, D’Angelo A, Tilleman K, Veleva Z, 
Nelen WL. Manual for ESHRE guideline development. 2020. 
https://www.eshre.eu/Guidelines-and-Legal/Guidelines/Guideline- 
development-process (10 February 2026, date last accessed).
Wang J, Ding J, Qu B, Zhang Y, Zhou Q. Does serum LH level influence 
IVF outcomes in women with PCOS undergoing GnRH-antagonist 
stimulation: a novel indicator. J Clin Med 2022;11:
Wang Q, Wan Q, Li T, Wang X, Hu Y, Zhong Z, Pu K, Ding Y, Tang X. 
Effect of GnRH agonist trigger with or without low-dose hCG on 
reproductive outcomes for PCOS women with freeze-all strategy: 
a propensity score matching study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2024; 
309:679–688.
Westergaard LG, Erb K, Laursen S, Rasmussen PE, Rex S. The effect 
of human menopausal gonadotrophin and highly purified, urine- 
derived follicle stimulating hormone on the outcome of in-vitro 
fertilization in down-regulated normogonadotrophic women. 
Hum Reprod 1996;11:1209–1213.
Wiser A, Gonen O, Ghetler Y, Shavit T, Berkovitz A, Shulman A. 
Monitoring stimulated cycles during in vitro fertilization treat­
ment with ultrasound only—preliminary results. Gynecol 
Endocrinol 2012;28:429–431.
Xu B, Geerts D, Yuan J, Wang M, Li Z, Lai Q, Zheng Y, Liu S, Yang S, 
Zhu G et al. A modified flexible GnRH antagonist protocol using 
antagonist early cessation and a gonadotropin step-down ap­
proach improves live birth rates in fresh cycles: a randomized 
controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2024;39:1969–1978.
Yang X, Lin G, Lu G, Gong F. Letrozole supplementation during con­
trolled ovarian stimulation in expected high responders: a pilot 
randomized controlled study. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2019;17:43.
Yoshida T, Takahashi O, Suzuki Y, Ota E, Hirata T. The effectiveness 
of controlled ovarian stimulation with tamoxifen for patients 
with estrogen-sensitive breast cancer: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Reprod Med Biol 2023;22:e12543.
Youssef MA, Abou-Setta AM, Lam WS. Recombinant versus urinary 
human chorionic gonadotrophin for final oocyte maturation trig­
gering in IVF and ICSI cycles. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 
4:CD003719.
Youssef MA, Van der Veen F, Al-Inany HG, Mochtar MH, Griesinger 
G, Nagi Mohesen M, Aboulfoutouh I, van Wely M. Gonadotropin- 
releasing hormone agonist versus HCG for oocyte triggering in 
antagonist-assisted reproductive technology. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2014;2014:CD008046.
Zaat T, Zagers M, Mol F, Goddijn M, van Wely M, Mastenbroek S; 
Cochrane Gynaecology and Fertility Group. Fresh versus frozen 
embryo transfers in assisted reproduction. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2021;2:CD011184.
Zegers-Hochschild F, Adamson GD, Dyer S, Racowsky C, de Mouzon 
J, Sokol R, Rienzi L, Sunde A, Schmidt L, Cooke ID et al. The 
International Glossary on Infertility and Fertility Care, 2017. Hum 
Reprod) 2017;32:1786–1801.
Zhang LJ, Liu D, Xu LQ, Wei JY, Fan L, Zhang XQ, Liu FH. 
Impact of luteinizing hormone on IVF/ICSI assisted reproduction 
on the initiation day of gonadotropin-releasing hormone antago­
nist protocol. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets 2024; 
2:CD011184.
Zhang W, Liu Z, Liu M, Li J, Guan Y. Is it necessary to monitor the se­
rum luteinizing hormone (LH) concentration on the human cho­
rionic gonadotropin (HCG) day among young women during the 
follicular-phase long protocol? A retrospective cohort study. 
Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2022;20:24.
Updated guideline on ovarian stimulation | 513  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026

Zhang Y, Liu L, Qin J, Huang H, Xue L, Wang S, Tan W. Evaluation of 
GnRH antagonist pretreatment before ovarian stimulation in a GnRH 
antagonist protocol in normal ovulatory women undergoing IVF/ 
ICSI: a randomized controlled trial. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2021;19:158.
Zhou R, Dong M, Huang L, Zhu X, Wei J, Zhang Q, Liu D, Zhang X, Liu F. 
Association between serum LH levels on hCG trigger day and 
live birth rate after fresh embryo transfer with GnRH antagonist 
regimen in different populations. Front Endocrinol 2023;14:1191827.
Zhu S, Lv Z, Song L, Zhang Q, Fan Y, Li J. Estradiol pretreatment in 
GnRH antagonist protocol for IVF/ICSI treatment. Open Med 2022; 
17:1811–1820.
Zhu X, Fu Y. Randomized, controlled pilot study of low-dose human 
chorionic gonadotropin administration beginning from the early 
follicular phase for women with polycystic ovarian syndrome un­
dergoing ovarian stimulation using the progesterone protocol. 
Front Endocrinol 2019;10:875.
© The Author(s) 2026. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (https://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly 
cited. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained 
through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals. 
permissions@oup.com.
Human Reproduction, 2026, 41, 498–514
https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deag018
ESHRE Pages
514 | The ESHRE Guideline Group on Ovarian Stimulation et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article/41/4/498/8495097 by guest on 07 June 2026